TUNI: Real-time RGB-T Semantic Segmentation with Unified
Multi-Modal Feature Extraction and Cross-Modal Feature Fusion

arXiv:2509.10005v1 [cs.CV] 12 Sep 2025

Xiaodong Guo, Tong Liu, Yike Li, Zi’ang Lin, Zhihong Deng
Abstract— RGB-thermal (RGB-T) semantic segmentation improves the environmental perception of autonomous platforms
in challenging conditions. Prevailing models employ encoders
pre-trained on RGB images to extract features from both RGB
and infrared inputs, and design additional modules to achieve
cross-modal feature fusion. This results in limited thermal
feature extraction and suboptimal cross-modal fusion, while
the redundant encoders further compromises the model’s realtime efficiency. To address the above issues, we propose TUNI,
with an RGB-T encoder consisting of multiple stacked blocks
that simultaneously perform multi-modal feature extraction and
cross-modal fusion. By leveraging large-scale pre-training with
RGB and pseudo-thermal data, the RGB-T encoder learns to
integrate feature extraction and fusion in a unified manner.
By slimming down the thermal branch, the encoder achieves a
more compact architecture. Moreover, we introduce an RGB-T
local module to strengthen the encoder’s capacity for crossmodal local feature fusion. The RGB-T local module employs
adaptive cosine similarity to selectively emphasize salient consistent and distinct local features across RGB-T modalities.
Experimental results show that TUNI achieves competitive
performance with state-of-the-art models on FMB, PST900 and
CART, with fewer parameters and lower computational cost.
Meanwhile, it achieves an inference speed of 27 FPS on a Jetson
Orin NX, demonstrating its real-time capability in deployment.
Codes are available at https://github.com/xiaodonguo/TUNI.

I. INTRODUCTION
The intelligence of autonomous platforms (e.g., mobile
robots, drones, autonomous cars) relies heavily on the
perception and understanding of their surroundings. RGBthermal semantic segmentation performs pixel-level classification on images, utilizing Red-Green-Blue (RGB) and
thermal information that captured by visible light and longwave infrared cameras, respectively. RGB information provides rich color and texture cues, while thermal information
captures heat distribution, serving as a complement in challenging scenarios, such as low-illumination, glare and low
color contrast [1], [2].
Unlike single-modal segmentation models, RGB-T segmentation models need to extract information from two
modalities while realize cross-modal feature fusion. As
shown in Fig. 1 (a), prevailing methods [3]–[5] typically
follow a pipeline consisting of independent feature extraction, cross-modal feature fusion, and decoding. Specifically,
modality-specific features are extracted from RGB and thermal images using the backbone pre-trained on ImageNet [6],
*This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62476026. (Corresponding author: Tong Liu).
Xiaodong Guo, Tong Liu, Yike Li, Zi’ang Lin and Zhihong Deng are
with the School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing
100081, China (e-mail: liutong2002@bit.edu.cn, 3120245534@bit.edu.cn).

Fig. 1. Two RGB-T semantic segmentation pipelines: (a) vanilla RGB-T
segmentation pipeline, (b) TUNI pipeline. The TUNI encoder unifies multimodal feature extraction and cross-modal fusion within a more compact
architecture.

followed by dedicated cross-modal feature fusion modules
deployed on four encoder stages. Although effective, this
pipeline suffers from three primary limitations, including
1) encoders pre-trained on RGB images are suboptimal for
thermal feature extraction, 2) cross-modal feature fusion only
on four encoder stages are insufficient, and 3) duplicated feature extraction structures introduce considerable redundancy,
substantially increasing the overall model complexity.
The first limitation stems from the modality constraint in
the pre-training phase. Large-scale datasets are fundamental
for training effective feature extractors; however, the absence
of thermal data makes it infeasible to the training on the
thermal modality. Alternatively, RGB pre-trained feature
extractors are utilized to extract thermal features, which
is suboptimal due to the heterogeneous nature of RGB

and thermal images. The second limitation arises from the
independence between the encoders and cross-modal feature
fusion modules. Commonly adopted strategies are to perform
cross-modal feature fusion at the four hierarchical feature
levels produced by encoders. However, a deep network
contains many feature extraction blocks between successive
layers, and limiting cross-modal fusion to only four stages is
insufficient to fully exploit the complementary information
across modalities. The final limitation is attributed to the
inherent information asymmetry between RGB and thermal
data. As thermal images convey less information than RGB
images, employing the same encoder is redundant. It is
imperative to eliminate redundant components for efficient
deployment on edge devices with limited resources.
Some of these limitations have been partially resolved by
prior studies; however, their solutions remain incomplete and
leave room for further improvement. Dong et al. [7] replace
the thermal encoders with multimodal prompt generation
modules, therefore reduce the complexity of the thermal
branch. Nevertheless, these modules are only applied to four
RGB encoder layers, which limits the fusion effectiveness.
Liu et al. [8] propose a multi-modal cross-prompt module
and insert it between each pair of RGB and thermal encoder
blocks, while the duplicated thermal encoder introduces redundancy. Zhou et al. [9], [10] adopt asymmetric lightweight
encoders to extract thermal features, such as Mit-B0 [11] and
MobileNet [12]. Although the model complexity is reduced,
the lightweight encoders pre-trained on RGB images lead
to limited capability to extract thermal feature. Moreover,
current research often achieves high model performance at
the cost of increased parameters and inference burden, while
overlooking deployment issues that are crucial for real-world
robotic applications.
To comprehensively address the aforementioned challenges, we propose the TUNI for real-time RGB-T semantic
segmentation in robotic applications. As shown in Fig 1 (b),
we propose an RGB-T encoder, which is used in both pretraining and fine-tuning phases. This encoder is composed
of multiple stacked blocks, each of which simultaneously
performs multi-modal feature extraction and cross-modal
feature fusion. In the pre-training phase, an RGB-T image
translation model [13] is utilized to generate pseudo-thermal
images. Using RGB and pseudo-thermal data, the RGB-T
encoder undergoes large-scale pre-training to jointly learn
multi-modal feature extraction and cross-modal feature fusion. Furthermore, by slimming down the thermal branch,
the encoder achieves a more compact architecture.
This idea is primarily motivated by DFormer [14], which
introduces RGB-depth (RGB-D) pre-training for RGB-D
semantic segmentation. Except for the different data preparation for the thermal modality, we further develop the network architecture. Specifically, each encoder block consists
of three modules: RGB-RGB local module, RGB-T global
module and RGB-T local module. The first two modules are
inherited from DFormer and are respectively used for RGB
local feature extraction and RGB-T global feature fusion. In
contrast with the Hamilton product for coarse local cross-

modal feature fusion used in DFormer, we further consider
the attribute differences between RGB-T information. The
RGB-T local module employs adaptive cosine similarity to
selectively emphasize salient consistent and distinct local
features across RGB-T modalities, achieving precise crossmodal local feature fusion.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a real-time RGB-T semantic segmentation
model, TUNI, for robotic application. With RGB-T pretraining, TUNI performs multi-modal feature extraction
while enhancing cross-modal feature fusion.
• We propose an RGB-T local module for precise crossmodal local feature fusion. It employs adaptive cosine
similarity to selectively emphasize salient consistent and
distinct local features across RGB-T modalities.
• We evaluate the performance of TUNI on FMB,
PST900, and CART datasets, demonstrating its competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods with a more compact architecture. Moreover,
TUNI achieves an inference speed of 120 frames per
second (FPS) on an RTX 4090 and 27 FPS on a Jetson
Orin NX.
II. RELATED WORK
The goal of RGB-T semantic segmentation is to exploit
the synergy between RGB and thermal modalities, thus
improving the robustness of the segmentation in challenging
scenarios. In current RGB-T semantic segmentation research,
encoders pre-trained on RGB modality (e.g., ResNet [15],
MiT [11], and Swin-Transformer [16]) are commonly employed to extract features from both RGB and thermal
inputs. Subsequently, dedicated cross-modal fusion modules
are designed to integrate RGB and thermal features in finetune phase. Zhou et al. [3] employ spatial attention on lowlevel features and channel attention on high-level features
to achieve adaptive cross-modal feature fusion. Zhang et al.
[5], [17] introduce cross-attention to construct long-range
dependency between RGB-T features. Guo et al. [4] propose
a multi-attribute hierarchical feature interaction module to
realize multi-scale cross-modal feature fusion. Liu et al.
[18] propose a multiplex interactive learning model, which
integrates multi-model, multi-modal and multi-level feature
learning. Zhou et al. [19] combine multi-modal features via
gating mechanisms and enhance spatial details via introducing edge information. In addition, prompt learning has been
introduced to address information asymmetry and reduce
encoder complexity. Dong et al. [7] present two prompt
learning modules to fuse cross-modal feature and adapt
prompted muti-modal features in the frozen encoder. Liu et
al. [8] develop a framework that exploits the complementarity
and bridges the semantic gap between modalities. To further
enhance the encoder’s ability to extract features from auxiliary modalities, Yin et al. [14] propose DFormer, which generates pseudo-depth images during the pre-training stage to
train an RGB-depth encoder. Nevertheless, its effectiveness
in RGB-T tasks remains unverified, and the fusion of crossmodal local features in DFormer remains relatively coarse.

Fig. 2. Illustration of TUNI. The TUNI encoder consists of multiple stacked RGB-T encoder blocks, each of which includes an RGB-RGB local module,
an RGB-T local module, and an RGB-T global module. The encoder is first pre-trained on RGB and pseudo-thermal data, and then fine-tuned with a
lightweight segmentation head on downstream task datasets.

Inspired by this, we propose TUNI, which incorporates RGBT pre-training and introduces a refined RGB-T local module,
achieving efficient RGB-T semantic segmentation.

modal feature fusion, no supplementary fusion modules are
needed during fine-tuning, with only an MLP decoder [11]
being employed for segmentation. Such a design enhances
the model’s compactness.

III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Overview
The overall architecture of TUNI is illustrated in Fig. 2.
It features a typical encoder–decoder architecture, with an
encoder for multi-modal feature extraction and cross-modal
feature fusion, and a task-specific decoder. The TUNI encoder consists of multiple blocks, each comprising three submodules: RGB-RGB local module, RGB-T global module
and RGB-T local module. These blocks are organized into
four stages {L1 , L2 , L3 , L4 }, where Ln indicates the number
of blocks. Through downsampling, the feature resolutions at
each stage are H/4 × W/4, H/8 × W/8, H/16 × W/16, and
H/32 × W/32, where H and W denote the height and width
of the original input image.
The training of TUNI consists of pre-training and finetuning phases. To obtain aligned thermal data, an image
translation model [13] is utilized to generalize pseudothermal images. The TUNI encoder is pre-trained using
pairs of RGB and pseudo-thermal images, along with a
classification head, as shown in Fig. 2 (a). The fine-tuning
is conducted on various segmentation datasets, as shown in
Fig. 2 (b). Since the encoder intrinsically integrates cross-

Fig. 3.
Two sub-modules in the TUNI encoder: (a) RGB-RGB local
module, (b) RGB-T global module.

B. RGB-RGB Local and RGB-T Global Modules
Inherited from DFormer, the RGB-RGB local and RGBT global modules implement local RGB feature extraction

and global RGB-T feature fusion, respectively. The internal
structure of the RGB-RGB local module is shown in Fig. 3
(a) (the normalization layer is omitted for convenience). In
addition to basic liner layers, a depthwise separable convolution layer is employed to further extract local features. This
module can be formulated as:
lrr = Linear(fr ) ⊙ DW Conv(Linear(fr ))

(1)

where fr and lrr denote RGB and local-enhanced RGB
features, respectively. Linear(.) and DW Conv(.) denote
the linear and depthwise separable convolution layers, respectively. ⊙ denotes the Hamilton product.
The RGB-T global module constructs cross-modal longrange dependencies via the cross-attention mechanism. As
shown in Fig. 3 (b), it first obtains the value and key vectors
of the RGB features, denoted as vr and kr , respectively:
(
vr = Linear(fr )
(2)
kr = Linear(fr )
Subsequently, the query vector qt is obtained from ft and fr
with average pooling operation to reduce the computational
burdens:
qt = Linear(P ool(Cat(ft , fr )))
(3)
where P ool downsamples the feature maps to 7 × 7. Finally,
long-range dependencies between RGB-T features are captured via self-attention, yielding the global RGB-T features
grt :
grt = Sof tM ax(qtT ⊗ kr ) ⊗ vr
(4)
where Sof tM ax and ⊗ denote the softmax operation and
matrix multiplication, respectively.
C. RGB-T Local Module
In addition to capturing long-range dependencies between
RGB-T features, local feature fusion plays a crucial role
in leveraging cross-modal information. In DFormer, crossmodal local feature fusion is performed simply using Hamilton product, overlooking the modality-specific differences in
RGB-T information. We further take into account both the
consistent and distinct information in cross-modal features,
and propose the RGB-T local module that employs dynamic
cosine similarity to select the most informative features, as
shown in Fig. 2 (c). Specifically, we extract cross-modal
consistent and distinct features, fc and fd , using Hamilton
product and absolute difference, respectively. This can be
formulated as:
(
fc = Linear(fr ) ⊙ Linear(ft )
(5)
fd = |Linear(fr ) − Linear(ft )|
Subsequently, two depthwise separable convolutions are applied to further extract the local information from the two
feature components:
fcd = Cat(DW Conv(fc ), DW Conv(fd ))

(6)

With the local information extracted, the module needs to
select the most informative features of fcd . The Squeeze-andExcitation block [20], a widely adopted channel attention
mechanism, provides an effective strategy for this purpose.
However, obtaining adaptive weights by pooling along the
spatial dimension inevitably results in local information loss.
In contrast, we propose an approach that derives adaptive
weights by measuring the cosine similarity between the
original features and the attention map produced by channelwise average pooling. It can be formulated as:
W = Cosine(fcd , Avg(fcd ))

(7)

where Avg denotes the channel-wise average pooling that
obtains the attention maps ∈ RH×W ×1 ; Cosine represents
the cosine similarity computation that derives the adaptive
weight W ∈ R1×1×C . Finally, the RGB-T local feature lrt is
obtained:
lrt = Linear(fcd ⊙ SE(W ))
(8)
where SE(.) denotes the Squeeze-and-Excitation block. With
lrr , grt , and lrt , the RGB-T encoder block obtains updated
RGB and thermal features fr′ and ft′ :
(
fr′ = Linear(Cat(lrr , grt , lrt ))
(9)
ft′ = Linear(Cat(lrr , grt , lrt ))
D. Loss Function
Following prior research [2], [5], an MLP decoder is used
to predict the semantic segmentation maps. As cross-modal
feature fusion is accomplished within each block, only the
RGB features from each encoder stage are fed into the MLP
decoder. This can be formulated as :
P re = M LP (R1 , R2 , R3 , R4 )

(10)

where M LP (.) refers to the MLP decoder;
{R1 , R2 , R3 , R4 } denote the RGB features from each
encoder stage. Considering the varying pixel distribution
of each object in the samples, we utilize the weighted
cross-entropy loss. In addition, dice loss was utilized to
further emphasize the segmentation of the foreground. The
loss function can be formulated as follows:
Loss = Lce (P re, GT ) + Ldice (P re, GT )

(11)

where P re and GT denote the prediction and the ground
truth (GT) images, respectively.
IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
A. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
In the pre-training phase, the encoder of TUNI is trained
on ImageNet; in the fine-tuning phase, TUNI is trained,
evaluated, and tested on FMB, PST900, and CART, which
correspond to urban, underground, and wild scenes, respectively. These diverse scene settings are adopted to assess the
model’s generalization ability.
The FMB dataset [21] comprises 1500 pairs RGB-T images under different illumination condition in urban scenes.
It labels 14 categories, including road, sidewalk, building,

TABLE I
C OMPLEXITY AND PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH SOTA METHODS ON FMB, PST900 AND CART. ‘–’ DENOTES MISSING INFORMATION AND
NON - PUBLIC MODELS , AND ‘×’ DENOTES INCOMPATIBILITY WITH THE T ENSOR RT ENGINE .

Model

Publication

Backbone

Params(G)↓

FLOPs(G)↓

GMNet
CMX
CMNext
CLNet-T
DFormer
MiLNet
AGFNet
DFromerV2
CPAL
TUNI

TIP’21
TITS’23
ICCV’23
KBS’24
ICLR’24
TIP’25
TITS’25
CVPR’25
TCSVT’25
-

ResNet101
Mit-B2
Mit-B2
Mit-B4
DFormer-B
Mit-B3
ResNet50
DFormerV2-S
Swin-T
TUNI

191.24
66.57
58.68
130.84
29.5
92.29
72.19
26.70
52.70
10.63

195.37
67.20
68.70
217.85
41.9
136.32
219.11
33.90
17.16

traffic light, traffic sign, vegetation, sky, person, car, truck,
bus, motorcycle, bicycle and pole. All images have a spatial
resolution of 800 × 600 pixels. The dataset is divided to
train/test set at a ratio of 8:2.
The PST900 dataset [22] comprises 894 pairs RGB-T
images captured in challenging underground environments.
It provides semantic segmentation annotations for 4 classes:
hand drill, backpack, fire extinguisher and survivor. Both the
RGB and thermal images have a spatial resolution of 1280 ×
720 pixels. The datasets was divided into train/test set with
at a ratio of 2:1.
The CART dataset [23] contains 2282 pairs of aligned
RGB-T images captured in various terrains, including rivers,
lakes, coastlines, deserts and forests. It provides semantic
segmentation labels for 10 classes: bare ground, rocky terrain, developed structures, road, shrubs, trees, sky, water,
vehicles, and person. Both the RGB and thermal images have
a spatial resolution of 960 × 640 pixels. The dateset was
randomly partitioned into train/val/test set at a 6:1:1 ratio.
We utilize the mean intersection over union (mIoU) to
assess the segmentation performance. Besides, we employ
floating point operations (FLOPs), the number of parameters
(Params), and FPS to assess the complexity of the model.
B. Implementation Details
The Pre-training is conducted on ImageNet with 8 RTX
4090 GPUs. An RGB-T translation model is utilized to
generate aligned RGB-T image pairs and a classifier head
is added to the TUNI encoder to build the classification
model. The training is optimized using AdamW with the
initial learning rate of 1e-3 and weight decay 5e-2, and the
batch size is set to 1024. The resolution of RGB-T image
pairs are resized to 224 × 224. We train the model for 300
epochs, and the model weight with the best performance on
the validation set is retained.
The Fine-tuning is conducted on FMB, PST900 and
CART, wih an RTX 4090 GPU. A lightweight segmentation
head is added to the TUNI encoder to build the segmentation

RTX 4090
41
63
67
28
69
25
33
120

FPS↑
Jetson Orin NX
CUDA
TensorRT
4
×
3
13
3
11
1
×
5
15
2
×
2
11
11
27

mIoU↑
FMB

PST900

CART

49.2
61.1
59.0
60.4
61.2
61.8
60.5
61.5
60.9
62.4

84.1
84.9
83.9
80.8
85.4
85.1
84.8
83.9
86.8
87.3

72.7
74.0
72.1
73.7
73.9
74.6
72.4
74.7

model. Before training, the TUNI encoder is initialized with
the pre-trained weights obtained from the pre-trianing phase,
whereas the segmentation head is initialized randomly. Image
resizing, random cropping and flipping were used to augment
the data during training, as the configure in the original
benchmark [21]–[23]. The training is optimized using Ranger
with the weight decay 5e-4 and initial learning rate 1e-4,
iter
power
multiplied by (1 − max
during training, with a
iter )
power of 0.9. For FMB, PST900, and CART, the training
epochs are set to 80, 200, and 300, with corresponding batch
sizes of 8, 2, and 8, respectively.
C. Comparison with SOTA models
1) Quantitative evaluation. The TUNI is compared to
9 SOTA models: GMNet [3], CMX [5], CMNeXt [17],
CLNet-T [4], DFormer [14], MiLNet [18], AGFNet [19],
DFormerV2 [24], CPAL [8]. As shown in Table I, high performance models are often accompanied by high complexity
(e.g., MILNet and CPAL), while lightweight models face
performance bottlenecks (e.g., DFormer and DFormerV2).
On the one hand, this is attributed to natural laws; on the
other hand, it stems from model redundancy as well as
insufficient multi-modal feature extraction and cross-modal
feature fusion, as discussed in Section I. In contrast, TUNI
achieves competitive performance with the best-performing
SOTA models, while maintaining a lightweight design. Compared to MiLNet, TUNI achieves competitive performance
while using only 1/9 of the Params, 1/8 of the FLOPs, and
achieving 5× the FPS. Compared to DFormer, TUNI attains
mIoU gains of 1.2%, 1.9%, and 0.8% on FMB, PST900, and
CART, respectively, while further reducing model size and
doubling inference speed.
To further demonstrate the model’s practical deployment
capability, we evaluate its inference speed on a Jetson
Orin NX. It can be observed that although SOTA models
can achieve high inference speeds on an RTX 4090 GPU
(e.g., DFormer, CMNeXt), they struggle to meet real-time
requirements on edge devices. In contrast, TUNI achieves

Fig. 4. Visual comparison of segmentation maps produced by TUNI and several SOTA models on FMB (left two columns), PST900 (middle two columns),
and CART (right two columns).

27 FPS with TensorRT acceleration under bf16 precision,
demonstrating its real-time performance in deployment scenarios.
2) Qualitative evaluation. Fig. 4 presents the visualization
results of TUNI compared with SOTA models on FMB,
PST900, and CART. Although more lightweight, TUNI generates segmentation maps of a quality comparable to SOTA
models, while achieving more fine-grained local results, as
highlighted by the red rectangles. This may be attributed
to our proposed RGB-T local module, which facilitates the
fusion of cross-modal local features.
D. Ablation Studies
To prove the effectiveness of the RGB-T pre-training and
modules in TUNI encoders, we conduct a series of ablation
studies.
Effectiveness of RGB-T Pre-training. Table II presents
three pre-training strategies, including ‘RGB-RGB’, ‘RGBD’, and ‘RGB-T’. ‘RGB-RGB’ denotes using identical RGB

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF DIFFERENT PRE - TRAINING STRATEGIES .
RGB-RGB
✓

RGB-D

RGB-T

✓
✓

FMB
59.0
58.1
62.4

CART
72.3
73.9
74.7

pairs as input to the TUNI encoder, ‘RGB-D’ refers to RGBD pairs generated as in [14], and ‘RGB-T’ represents our
RGB-T pre-training strategy. Compared with ‘RGB-RGB’,
our approach improves mIoU by 3.4% on FMB and 2.4%
on CART. This indicates that 1) the encoder pre-trained on
the RGB modality is suboptimal in fine-tuning for RGBT semantic segmentation, and 2) pre-training with RGB-T
data effectively enhances the encoder’s ability to capture
features from the thermal modality. Compared with ‘RGBDepth’, our approach improves mIoU by 4.3% on FMB and

TABLE III
A BLATION OF SUB - MODULES IN TUNI ENCODER .
Module
w/o RGB-RGB Local Module
w/o RGB-T Global Module
w/o RGB-T Local Module
Modules of DFormer
TUNI

Params
9.14
9.52
9.54
10.36
10.63

FLOPs
15.65
16.43
16.16
16.96
17.16

FMB
61.7
61.3
59.4
59.8
62.4

CART
73.4
73.3
73.5
73.5
74.7

TABLE IV
A BLATION OF COMPONENTS IN THE RGB-T L OCAL M ODULE .
Co&Di

SE

Cosine

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓

Params
9.54
10.52
10.63
10.63

FLOPs
16.16
17.16
17.16
17.16

FMB
59.4
61.3
61.6
62.4

CART
73.5
74.2
74.2
74.7

0.8% on CART. This further demonstrates that the modality
used during pre-training affects the performance of RGB-T
semantic segmentation.
Effectiveness of Modules in the TUNI Encoder. Table
III presents the ablation results of various model variants.
‘w/o RGB-RGB Local Module’ and ‘w/o RGB-T Global
Module’ denote the TUNI encoder without the RGB-RGB
local modules and RGB-T global modules, respectively.
Compared with TUNI, their performance decreases on both
datasets. ‘w/o RGB-T Local Module’ refers to the TUNI
encoder with the RGB-T local modules removed, which
leads to a 3.0% and 1.2% reduction in mIoU on FMB and
CART, respectively. In addition, the module introduces only
1.09M parameters and 1.00G FLOPs, confirming its efficiency in fusing RGB and thermal local features. ‘Modules
of DFormer’ represnets the original DFormer encoder, which
differs from TUNI in that it relies on a simple Hamilton
product for cross-modal local feature fusion. Its performance
shows little improvement compared with the variant ‘w/o
RGB-T Local Module’, indicating that using a simple feature
fusion strategy is ineffective for RGB-T local feature fusion.
This further validates the necessity of our proposed RGB-T
local module.
Effectiveness of Components in the RGB-T Local Modules. We conduct a fine-grained ablation study to assess the
effectiveness of individual components, with results shown in
Table IV. ‘Co&Di’ denotes the interaction of consistent and
distinct cross-modal features, including linear and depthwise
separable convolution layers. ‘SE’ and ‘Cosine’ denote the
squeeze-and-excitation and cosine similarity components,
respectively. Incorporating ‘Co&Di’ yields mIoU improvements of 1.9% and 0.7% on FMB and CART, respectively.
This demonstrates the effectiveness of multi-attribute feature
interaction. However, adding ‘SE’ brings little improvement,
likely due to the weights obtained from global spatial
averaging lacking local feature representativeness. Without

introducing additional computational or parameter overhead,
incorporating cosine similarity yields mIoU gains of 0.8%
and 0.5% on FMB and CART, respectively, thereby confirming the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
E. Limitation and Future Work
We adopt a simplified encoder for a lightweight, real-time
model, resulting in limited performance improvement over
SOTA models. Optimizing model performance via RGBT pre-training remains an open question. In future work,
we plan to progressively refine the model structure and investigate the trade-off between complexity and performance
under RGB-T pre-training. While model simplification favors
efficiency, knowledge distillation [25] offers a complementary approach to improve performance without significantly
increasing complexity. Existing methods, however, typically
apply distillation only during fine-tuning [2], [4], limiting
performance due to scarce data and pre-trained backbones.
We will explore distillation during pre-training and its impact
on downstream tasks.
V. CONCLUSION
We propose a real-time RGB-T semantic segmentation
model, TUNI, for robotic application. The TUNI encoder
integrates muti-modal feature extraction and cross-modal feature fusion, with RGB-T pre-training effectively enhancing
both components. In addition, an RGB-T local module is
introduced to emphasize salient consistent and distinct local
features across RGB-T modalities, thereby improving crossmodal local fusion. As a result, we achieve the following
outcomes: 1) TUNI achieves competitive performance with
SOTA models on FMB, PST900 and CART, with fewer
parameters and lower computational cost, 2) TUNI demonstrates finer segmentation details in local regions, 3) TUNI
achieves 120 FPS on an RTX 4090 and 27 FPS on a Jetson
Orin NX, demonstrating its real-time capability in practical
applications, and 4) ablation results further confirm the
contributions of the RGB-T pre-training and the RGB-T local
module to performance improvement. In future research, we
aim to investigate the trade-off between model accuracy and
efficiency, and further explore how knowledge distillation in
the pre-training stage influences fine-tuning performance.
R EFERENCES
[1] Q. Ha, K. Watanabe, T. Karasawa, Y. Ushiku, and T. Harada, “Mfnet:
Towards real-time semantic segmentation for autonomous vehicles
with multi-spectral scenes,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017, pp. 5108–5115.
[2] X. Guo, T. Liu, Y. Mou, S. Chai, B. Ren, Y. Wang, W. Shi, S. Liu,
and W. Zhou, “Transferring prior thermal knowledge for snowy
urban scene semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 12 474–12 487, 2025.
[3] W. Zhou, J. Liu, J. Lei, L. Yu, and J.-N. Hwang, “Gmnet: Gradedfeature multilabel-learning network for rgb-thermal urban scene
semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
vol. 30, pp. 7790–7802, 2021.
[4] X. Guo, W. Zhou, and T. Liu, “Contrastive learning-based knowledge distillation for rgb-thermal urban scene semantic segmentation,”
Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 292, p. 111588, 2024.

[5] J. Zhang, H. Liu, K. Yang, X. Hu, R. Liu, and R. Stiefelhagen, “CMX:
Cross-modal fusion for RGB-X semantic segmentation with transformers,” IEEE Transactions on intelligent transportation systems, vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 14 679–14 694, 2023.
[6] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei,
“Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in 2009 IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2009, pp. 248–
255.
[7] S. Dong, Y. Feng, Q. Yang, Y. Huang, D. Liu, and H. Fan, “Efficient
multimodal semantic segmentation via dual-prompt learning,” in 2024
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2024, pp. 14 196–14 203.
[8] Y. Liu, P. Wu, M. Wang, and J. Liu, “Cpal: Cross-prompting adapter
with loras for rgb+x semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5858–
5871, 2025.
[9] W. Zhou, J. Hong, W. Yan, and Q. Jiang, “Modal evaluation network
via knowledge distillation for no-service rail surface defect detection,”
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 3930–3942, 2024.
[10] W. Zhou, X. Sun, X. Qian, and M. Fang, “Asymmetrical contrastive
learning network via knowledge distillation for no-service rail surface
defect detection,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 12 469–12 482, 2025.
[11] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and P. Luo,
“Segformer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation
with transformers,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 34, pp. 12 077–12 090, 2021.
[12] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen,
“Mobilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in 2018
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2018, pp. 4510–4520.
[13] D. Lee, M. Jeon, Y. Cho, and A. Kim, “Edge-guided multi-domain
rgb-to-tir image translation for training vision tasks with challenging
labels,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2023, pp. 8291–8298.
[14] B. Yin, X. Zhang, Z.-Y. Li, L. Liu, M.-M. Cheng, and Q. Hou,
“DFormer: Rethinking RGBD representation learning for semantic
segmentation,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024.
[15] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.
[16] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and
B. Guo, “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021, pp. 9992–10 002.
[17] J. Zhang, R. Liu, H. Shi, K. Yang, S. Reiß, K. Peng, H. Fu, K. Wang,
and R. Stiefelhagen, “Delivering arbitrary-modal semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 1136–1147.
[18] J. Liu, H. Liu, X. Li, J. Ren, and X. Xu, “Milnet: Multiplex interactive
learning network for rgb-t semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, vol. 34, pp. 1686–1699, 2025.
[19] X. Zhou, X. Wu, L. Bao, H. Yin, Q. Jiang, and J. Zhang, “Agfnet:
Adaptive gated fusion network for rgb-t semantic segmentation,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 26, no. 5, pp.
6477–6492, 2025.
[20] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,”
in 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[21] J. Liu, Z. Liu, G. Wu, L. Ma, R. Liu, W. Zhong, Z. Luo, and
X. Fan, “Multi-interactive feature learning and a full-time multimodality benchmark for image fusion and segmentation,” in 2023
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
2023, pp. 8081–8090.
[22] S. S. Shivakumar, N. Rodrigues, A. Zhou, I. D. Miller, V. Kumar, and
C. J. Taylor, “Pst900: Rgb-thermal calibration, dataset and segmentation network,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2020, pp. 9441–9447.
[23] C. Lee, M. Anderson, N. Ranganathan, X. Zuo, K. Do, G. Gkioxari,
and S.-J. Chung, “Caltech aerial rgb-thermal dataset in the wild,” in
Computer Vision – ECCV 2024: 18th European Conference, 2024, p.
236–256.

[24] B.-W. Yin, J.-L. Cao, M.-M. Cheng, and Q. Hou, “Dformerv2:
Geometry self-attention for rgbd semantic segmentation,” in 2025
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2025, pp. 19 345–19 355.
[25] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.

